This survey paper describes a focused literature survey of machine learning (ML) and data mining (DM) methods for cyber analytics in support of intrusion detection. Short tutorial descriptions of each ML/DM method are provided. Based on the number of citations or the relevance of an emerging method, papers representing each method were identified, read, and summarized. Because data are so important in ML/DM approaches, some well-known cyber data sets used in ML/DM are described. The complexity of ML/DM algorithms is addressed, discussion of challenges for using ML/DM for cyber security is presented, and some recommendations on when to use a given method are provided.

This paper presents the results of a literature survey of machine learning (ML) and data mining (DM) methods for cyber security applications. The ML/DM methods are described, as well as several applications of each method to cyber intrusion detection problems. The complexity of different ML/DM algorithms is discussed, and the paper provides a set of comparison criteria for ML/DM methods and a set of recommendations on the best methods to use depending on the characteristics of the cyber problem to solve.
Cyber security is the set of technologies and processes designed to protect computers, networks, programs, and data from attack, unauthorized access, change, or destruction. Cyber security systems are composed of network security systems and computer (host) security systems. Each of these has, at a minimum, a firewall, antivirus software, and an intrusion detection system (IDS). IDSs help discover, determine, and identify unauthorized use, duplication, alteration, and destruction of information systems [1]. The security breaches include external intrusions (attacks from outside the organization) and internal intrusions (attacks from within the organization).
There are three main types of cyber analytics in support of IDSs: misuse-based (sometimes also called signature-based), anomaly-based, and hybrid. Misuse-based techniques are designed to detect known attacks by using signatures of those attacks. They are effective for detecting known type of attacks without generating an overwhelming number of false alarms. They require frequent manual updates of the database with rules and signatures. Misuse-based techniques cannot detect novel (zero-day) attacks.
Anomaly-based techniques model the normal network and system behavior, and identify anomalies as deviations from normal behavior. They are appealing because of their ability to detect zero-day attacks. Another advantage is that the profiles of normal activity are customized for every system, application, or network, thereby making it difficult for attackers to know which activities they can carry out undetected. Additionally, the data on which anomaly-based techniques alert (novel attacks) can be used to define the signatures for misuse detectors. The main disadvantage of anomaly-based techniques is the potential for high false alarm rates (FARs) because previously unseen (yet legitimate) system behaviors may be categorized as anomalies.
Hybrid techniques combine misuse and anomaly detection. They are employed to raise detection rates of known intrusions and decrease the false positive (FP) rate for unknown attacks. An in-depth review of the literature did not discover many pure anomaly detection methods; most of the methods were really hybrid. Therefore, in the descriptions of ML and DM methods, the anomaly detection and hybrid methods are described together.
Another division of IDSs is based on where they look for intrusive behavior: network-based or host-based. A network-based IDS identifies intrusions by monitoring traffic through network devices. A host-based IDS monitors process and file activities related to the software environment associated with a specific host.
This survey paper focuses on ML and DM techniques for cyber security, with an emphasis on the ML/DM methods and their descriptions. Many papers describing these methods have been published, including several reviews. In contrast to previous reviews, the focus of our paper is on publications that meet certain criteria. Google Scholar queries were performed using “machine learning” and cyber, and using “data mining” and cyber. Special emphasis was placed on highly cited papers because these described popular techniques. However, it was also recognized that this emphasis might overlook significant new and emerging techniques, so some of these papers were chosen also. Overall, papers were selected so that each of the ML/DM categories listed later had at least one and preferably a few representative papers.
This paper is intended for readers who wish to begin research in the field of ML/DM for cyber intrusion detection. As such, great emphasis is placed on a thorough description of the ML/DM methods, and references to seminal works for each ML and DM method are provided. Some examples are provided as to how the techniques were used in cyber security.
This paper does not describe all the different techniques of network anomaly detection, as do Bhuyan et al. [2]; instead it concentrates only on ML and DM techniques. However, in addition to the anomaly detection, signature-based and hybrid methods are depicted. The descriptions of the methods in the present survey are more in-depth than in [2].
Nguyen et al. [3] describe ML techniques for Internet traffic classification. The techniques described therein do not rely on well-known port numbers but on statistical traffic characteristics. Their survey only covers papers published in 2004 to 2007, where our survey includes more recent papers. Unlike Nguyen et al. [3], this paper presents methods that work on any type of cyber data, not only Internet Protocol (IP) flows.
Teodoro et al. [4] focus on anomaly-based network intrusion techniques. The authors present statistical, knowledge-based, and machine-learning approaches, but their study does not present a full set of state-of-the-art machine-learning methods. In contrast, this paper describes not only anomaly detection but also signature-based methods. Our paper also includes the methods for recognition of type of the attack (misuse) and for detection of an attack (intrusion). Lastly, our paper presents the full and latest list of ML/DM methods that are applied to cyber security.
Sperotto et al. [5] focus on Network Flow (NetFlow) data and point out that the packet processing may not be possible at the streaming speeds due to the amount of traffic. They describe a broad set of methods to detect anomalous traffic (possible attack) and misuse. However, unlike our paper, they do not include explanations of the technical details of the individual methods.
Wu et al. [6] focus on Computational Intelligence methods and their applications to intrusion detection. Methods such as Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), Fuzzy Systems, Evolutionary Computation, Artificial Immune Systems, and Swarm Intelligence are described in great detail. Because only Computational Intelligence methods are described, major ML/DM methods such as clustering, decision trees, and rule mining (that this paper addresses) are not included.
This paper focuses primarily on cyber intrusion detection as it applies to wired networks. With a wired network, an adversary must pass through several layers of defense at firewalls and operating systems, or gain physical access to the network. However, a wireless network can be targeted at any node, so it is naturally more vulnerable to malicious attacks than a wired network. The ML and DM methods covered in this paper are fully applicable to the intrusion and misuse detection problems in both wired and wireless networks. The reader who desires a perspective focused only on wireless network protection is referred to papers such as Zhang et al. [7], which focuses more on dynamic changing network topology, routing algorithms, decentralized management, etc.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II focuses on major steps in ML and DM. Section III discusses cyber security data sets used in ML and DM. Section IV describes the individual methods and related papers for ML and DM in cyber security. Section V discusses the computational complexity of different methods. Section VI describes observations and recommendations. Lastly, Section VII presents conclusions.

The paper describes the literature review of ML and DM methods used for cyber. Special emphasis was placed on finding example papers that describe the use of different ML and DM techniques in the cyber domain, both for misuse and anomaly detection. Unfortunately, the methods that are the most effective for cyber applications have not been established; and given the richness and complexity of the methods, it is impossible to make one recommendation for each method, based on the type of attack the system is supposed to detect. When determining the effectiveness of the methods, there is not one criterion but several criteria that need to be taken into account. They include (as described in Section VI, Subsection C) accuracy, complexity, time for classifying an unknown instance with a trained model, and understandability of the final solution (classification) of each ML or DM method. Depending on the particular IDS, some might be more important than others.
Another crucial aspect of ML and DM for cyber intrusion detection is the importance of the data sets for training and testing the systems. ML and DM methods cannot work without representative data, and it is difficult and time consuming to obtain such data sets. To be able to perform anomaly detection and misuse detection, it is advantageous for an IDS to be able to reach network- and kernel-level data. If only NetFlow data are available, these data must be augmented by network-level data such as network sensors that generate additional features of packets or streams. If possible, the network data should be augmented by OS kernel-level data.
The biggest gap observed is the availability of labeled data, and definitely a worthwhile investment would be to collect data and label some of it. Using this new data set, several promising ML and DM methods could be used to develop models and compared, narrowing the list of ML and DM effective for cyber applications. Significant advances could be made to ML and DM methods in cyber security using this data set and breakthroughs could be possible.
There are some peculiarities of the cyber problem that make ML and DM methods more difficult to use (as described in Section VI, Subsection D). They are especially related to how often the model needs to be retrained. A fertile area of research would be to investigate the methods of fast incremental learning that could be used for daily updates of models for misuse and anomaly detection.